Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host as always Ricardo Loops. And
today I'm joined by Doctor Stephanie. Her, she is
a researcher, broadcaster and author focused on technology, politics
and history. And today we're going to talk about
her book Technology is Not Neutral, a short guide
to technology ethics. So doctor her, welcome to the
show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for having me or Gala.
Great. So um uh tech uh technology ethics, I
guess that uh people who think about is who
look at these would think that OK, it's just
another uh philosophy thing. Why should we care about
that? It's just some about some abstract questions. But
I mean, what is it really about? And what
kinds of uh more practical questions, let's say, does
it deal with?
I love, I love your idea of like one
more philosophy is if we're being bombarded by philosophies
and all the time, and there's just philosophers walking
around selling their wares in the street, which I
guess is maybe true, we would just call them
marketing people now. Uh No. So I think, look,
I think technology and the way that humans have
a relationship with technology has existed probably since we,
you know, developed depos, thumbs and started making tools.
Um, YOU know, so we would have picked up
bones or stones or twigs and started fashioning them
creating fire. And probably from that moment you started
having human beings disagreeing about, you know, when is
it acceptable to make a fire? What are the
rules around fire? Is fire for cooking and keeping
us warm and keeping predators away or is it
ok to like torch our enemy camps village? Um,
OR use it, you know, launch it into an
arrow and shoot it at people. So I just
feel like in some ways it's like nothing new
under the sun, as Shakespeare said, it's, it's always
been there. So I don't feel like this is
like a new idea, um that people are hawking.
I think it's, it's one of the oldest things
because it's so fundamental to us. Beings have been
making technology, you know, for a really long time.
And we've also been philosophizing for a really long
time because if we think about philosophy, kind of
the way it's taught today, it's very abstract. We
think about it in universities, uh you know, philosophy
departments writing about topics that most of us probably
are never going to read a book about, uh
or an article or really care, which is a
shame because we're actually doing philosophy all the time.
We're doing it every day. So if you're interested
in, in power and in politics that welcome to
philosophy, you're doing political philosophy. If you're interested in
like good and bad, right and wrong, um where
do we draw the line on certain things? Welcome
to philosophy. You're doing ethics. If you have really
strong views on aesthetics, which could be anything from,
you know, design in your house to like the
sustainability or labor relations that go into the materials
that you buy, any product that you buy or
service that you buy or even things like user
design and user experience. Welcome to philosophy, you are
doing aesthetics, right, and so on and so forth.
So we're doing it all the time, but I
think we weren't certainly in the Anglo Saxon world,
we're not really taught it in the way that
often you are in the continent much more explicitly.
So I think that was like the first bridge
I wanted to build with people that I work
with both in my client work. But also in
my writing was to kind of get everybody confident
with the fact that actually you've already been doing
this your whole life. So now that we give
you the terms, you have like a name for
what you're doing. And I can take you through
examples of how you've been doing it, that's a
bit empowering and confidence building. So now you can
start doing it deliberately because that is uh that
is a shift. I think there's something really cool
about how philosophy exists as a tool set. It's
very practical. It's very pragmatic. So if you're facing,
oh, I don't know, a problem or an opportunity
you're trying to evaluate to do something or not
to do something or just what you think about
something. Like, what's your point of view on it?
Sometimes, particularly today, life is very complicated. It can
be nice to have a tool set that helps
you to think through things so that you can
do it with a bit of rigor and then
you can talk about it. It gives you like
a shared menu if you will a shared script
for talking about it with other people. And it's
really nice if you're a problem solver by a
profession, which doesn't necessarily mean you have to be
a technologist or an engineer. You might be a
problem solver as a lawyer, as a regulator. Um
You might be, or even as like a CEO
and you're having to figure out, you know, do
we go this way or that way? What, what
problem I'm trying to solve here. It can be
really nice because it's like a due diligence exercise
that allows you, you can go through it and
when you're done, you're like, OK, I've done this,
I've done this, I've done this, I've done this
and that's really helpful. So I think that's the
thing that I find really exciting about technology ethics
is it's really practical. Like when I go in
and teach this to people afterwards, they're like, we're
doing our, the way our team functions is different
now or the way that we tackle opportunity and
risk assessment is different now and by different, I'm
hoping they mean better. Right. So it doesn't have
to necessarily be right now. A I Ethics is
very buzzy and has been for a couple of
years. But like, I don't limit my analysis to
A II I go as broad as you can
in terms of all technology because A I is
just, it's an exciting technology and it is definitely
the technology of the day in terms of the
media and marketing cycle. But there's so much more,
there's so much more we can do with philosophy
in terms of the human tech relationship. So I
think it's really fun. I wouldn't, I wouldn't have
spent my time on it if I found it
boring or not useful. Um On the contrary, once
I started really working with this, I was like,
this is powerful and it's helpful and that is
great because if you are trying to tackle particularly
complicated problems, you need every tool that you have.
Uh And I mean, the main question you tackle
in the book is, is technology neutral. And uh
of course, just by looking at the title, your
position is obvious, but e even before we get
into your position and go through some examples that
really are illustrative of the fact that technology might
not be neutral. Give us perhaps some examples of
arguments from the other side. People who argue that
technology is indeed neutral, that you find perhaps the
most compelling.
Yeah. So I actually used to think technology was
neutral. It was, it was in the writing of
the book that I had to change my mind
and I'll give a few examples of why I
used to think this. Um First of all, I
came from a business perspective where and I should
declare my nationality interest. So I'm American by birth.
And then I've had my career in the United
Kingdom. So this is very much an Anglo Saxon
uh free market capitalism, hardcore perspective because I appreciate
that's not the case everywhere. Uh For your global
audience of this interview, that perspective uh is very
anti regulation. Regulation is always being portrayed as like
hindering innovation. It's going to stop innovation and innovation
is really key particularly in the US, you know,
to American superpower, competitiveness. So anything that would hinder
that instantly becomes political, it doesn't matter if you're
a Republican or Democrat, everybody's like, oh, nobody wants
to, everything that hinders that is the bloody communists.
Exactly. Like take your pick. Are we scared of
like the former Soviet Union in the eighties? It
was Japan now. It's China, right? So like nobody
wants to hinder innovation with pesky regulation. Uh SO
you have, you have that, that right there shows
you like, it's not at the end of the,
the innovation cycle. If you will, you decide, you
build something and you decide if you're going to
regulate it or not, that is inherently not neutral.
But the way it was being portrayed to argue
against regulation, you would be like, whoa, whoa, whoa
um you know, classic example in the United States
is guns don't kill people, people kill people. And
that argument has been if you will weaponized uh
very successfully in the United States to stop us
from doing any real meaningful gun control. Not just
because we have the second amendment which gives Americans
the right to bear arms, but when that law
was crafted, we didn't have some of the weapons
that we have today that you can buy at
your local Walmart. Um OFTEN without an ID background
check, it's actually quite staggering. And so the founding
fathers were not imagining taking guns and walking into
a school and shooting up an entire school, which
unfortunately is a very common occurrence now, um, tragically,
all too common. And so I started looking at
being like, well on the one hand, it is
true guns do not on their own, kill someone
because they can't like self pull the trigger, they
can't self shoot if you will. Although people I'm
sure are now working on building guns that do
exactly that A I powered weaponry but even then
there's a human that's, that's ultimately coding that and
controlling it. So it's still, there's always a human
that takes the gun and makes the decision to
pull a trigger. But I also was like, yeah,
but the muskets that were there in the 18th
century are really different from like an A K
15 assault rifle. You can kill a lot more
people with the latter than with the former. So
like a gun is not just a gun, like
even within like the gun analogy, the amount of
harm I can do with a musket versus like
a pistol versus like the kind of weaponry that
frankly, you should only ever be seeing held by
the military in like a theater of war and
is unfortunately on the street or in people's homes,
um is, is like inherently not neutral. There were
design choices that went into the making of the
gun, the way that the bullets are done. Um
There's like cop killer bullets that can pierce um
body armor, right? So like the people who designed
that knew that and the people who are choosing
to sell it know it. So like they're not
neutral either because you could decide to be like,
we're not selling guns here and there indeed was
a sporting store in the U SI think it
was Dick's sporting good sporting goods, which decided not
to. And then it got this massive blowback and
it became a national issue precisely because they were
exercising their right not to sell. Right. But that's
not neutral because now you're like removing my, my
right. Damn it to have guns. Um, SO this
isn't like a, I don't want to make a
sort of pro or anti gun statement. I have
my own view on that obviously, of course, as
a citizen, I'm sure it's probably obvious from here.
But what I mean is even with something that's
like such a little easy example, like guns, easy.
And compared in comparison to A I because it's
just a physical, you know, tool, even that you
start to realize like it is not neutral to
decide to design bullets that can pierce wound right.
There's like no other reason that you would do
that. There's no other purpose of particularly a good
benign purpose that you could use that for. So
when you start thinking about it in that way,
you can actually start looking at pretty much, I'm
just looking around my my house right now, like
almost any object, you're like, shit. Somebody has designed
every aspect of it from the, the raw materials
that were pulled out of the ground to like
the environmental impact of that, to how much the
workers all got paid all along the supply chain,
all of it. Um Whether or not it's designed
for the majority of the population, which is right
handed or like, do we take left handed people
into account What about if you're color blind? What
if you have like dyslexia, like every single design
consideration is not neutral. And that's just, that's just,
again, that's for like analog world, physical objects. Now
you take that to the next level and you
start getting into code, it's the same principle, but
it's also like turbocharged because A I, one of
the things that's fascinating about what the world we're
living in now is that because we have more
data than ever before and computer processing power than
ever before. We can do things faster and at
a greater scale than at any time in human
history. Whether or not that will hold by the
way is very contentious. We don't know if we've
reached the limits of computer processing power. For instance,
we definitely haven't reached the limits of data. So
that starts getting really messy. You also look at
like who is doing the designing, be it for
code or a physical object and those groups are
not representative of the whole of our populations, which
is why it can sound like diversity and equality
and inclusion. We call it de I here. I'm
not sure what it is in, in um Portuguese,
but you probably have a similar concept
for it. Yeah, the initials are pretty much the
same, the same.
Ok, cool. So de I can in many ways
just seem like another version of being politically correct
writer in the United States. A woke and it
seems like a bad thing. I don't look at
it as a bad thing in terms of the
political sense. I look at it from a design
perspective of being like I want, if I'm selling
something, you know, bring out the capitalism. If I'm
selling a service or a tool or a product,
I want it to work for the vast majority,
it ideally for everybody. So I have a challenge
there because I need it to scale. But I
also need to be able to personalize and customize,
depending on your individual needs or the needs of
your company or the needs of the country that
you're based in. Right? Because you might have different
laws there. Um How do I, how do I
focus on that? And that kind of stuff really
fascinates me because I don't understand why it gets
lampooned so much in certain certain branches of the
press and indeed investment communities as being politicized because
I'm like, that's just truly, that's just good business.
But like that, you know, that's just my, that's
just my view, but I would assume as a
good hearted capitalist that you would want to design
products that the, you know, the majority of people
can buy because that's, you know, catching more money.
So it's very strange. Um So I guess that's
what I mean when I say like technology ethics
is so much bigger than just like, is something
good or bad. Like that's a really binary way
of looking at it. It's very complex and rich.
It's like a tapestry, you start pulling on one
thread and then you pull on another and another
and you, you know, you come out with this
whole complex analysis that you can use if you
wish to make things better.
Yeah, I mean, at a certain point there, you
mentioned regulation and regulation across different countries. And perhaps
later in the interview when we talk about specific
kinds of technologies, we can come back to this
because uh recently with the release of threads, it's
interesting because here in the European Union, it's not
available yet and it has to do with data
privacy, online privacy, data collection, data, the ownership and
all of that. So uh we can come back
to this uh later. But uh I mean, uh
at a certain point you mentioned there or alluded
to one of the points you make in the
book because at a certain point you talk about
or explore the idea of what is a tool
and the di the difference, for example, between tools
that are found and tools that are created. So
uh uh tell us a little bit about that
because I think it's very helpful in terms of
trying to reframe the way we think about these
questions.
Yeah. So for me, this was um I wrote
a lot of the book during the pandemic during
lockdown. Uh And I would, you know, I go
for my sort of hour long walk sometimes longer
than an hour who the British police will find
out now that I was walking for an hour
and a half. Um, I would do these really
long laps around my local park and, you know,
there was such a weird time. Right. It was
such a strange time for all of us and
I started to really go into some fairly abstract
directions of thinking. And so one of the things
was like, let's think of the most neutral tool
possible and then the most like non neutral tool.
So my examples because, you know, I wanted to
like draw the, the map if you will or
draw matrix, you know, so what's what's like the
most neutral and the the most completely value laden
um thing. So the, the hardcore one for me
was the atomic bomb, which was, there's only one
reason that you would build an atomic bomb and
only one reason you're really going to use it,
which is to harm because there's, there's no like
there's no way of getting around that harm. It
will, you know, the radiation damage to any human
that comes within the blast radius and also just
like other parts of nature for sure. Um IS
just non negotiable, it's going to happen in physics.
So there's that, but there's also like the only
two times that human beings have used, it was
in the theater of war Right. So, it was
like, it was designed in a war to be
used in a war and we have lived under
the shadow of threat of nuclear war ever since.
And I grew up in the Cold War in
the US. So, for me as a child, this
was like the scariest thing that could ever happen
to human beings as a nuke, like a rogue
nuke situation or nukes getting out of control and
just decimating entire countries.
And very, unfortunately recently we've been living more or
less through that kind of fear and we're still
living through
that. Yeah, I mean, that's the thing is like,
everybody freaks out about A I, and I'm like,
there's all these nukes, you know, it's like thousands
and thousands of them and like, lots of countries
have them that maybe shouldn't and it's too late
now. Like, we can't put that genie back in
the bottle. So that was like, that was, that
was over here in my most extreme example of
a technology that, like, you just wouldn't use a
nuke for something good. Maybe you would have like,
aliens were coming or an asteroid that was attacking
earth and the only way we could stop it
would be if we, like, launched a nuke out
in space to, you know, blow up the asteroid.
This is how I talk with little kids about
tech ethics and they're like, they get it. They're
like, yeah, you nuke against the asteroid. Maybe not
the alien though. But, uh, we would want to
talk with them first. Perhaps so. Yeah.
Yeah. Perhaps. Let's not just assume immediately that they
would come here to work and we would be
preemptively killing another life farmer. I mean, come on,
let's just give them a chance.
Exactly. That's, that's my view as well in case
they're listening. Uh, BUT then the other extreme I
was like, well, what's the other, other extreme? And
I got really into looking at nature when I
was on my walks. And of course, this led
to animals who use tools because what humans are
not the only species that make tools, which is
so cool, you can really go down a rabbit
hole with this. Um And I did, I went
down that rabbit hole so that you don't have
to and looked at all of the different ways
that animals fashion tools. And of course, this starts
to become if you're interested in the history of
what differentiates human beings from our other ape chimpanzee
brethren. One of the big questions was human beings
make tools. That's like a defining characteristic of what
it means to be human, which is kind of
trippy if you think about. Well, so the crows.
So like, why is, why is that about making
us human? But it just is. And so that
was one of the things when Jane Goodall was
um doing her amazing research about chimpanzees and she
wrote to her then phd supervisor to describe what
she was observing and he wrote back saying either
we have to redefine what a tool is or
we have to redefine what man is. And I
was like, oh, there's something in this. And so
it was like, well, what are those animals doing?
And what were we doing? So, they were doing
something along the lines of what I call a
found tool. So they would find an object in
nature, a stone, um, a branch and they would
fashion it in some way to make a weapon.
Usually it's used to hunt for food, um, rather
than harm others, trapping food, et cetera, but it
showed like advanced cognitive abilities. So I was like,
ok, they're taking something that, that exists already and
they're fashioning it in some way and they're coming
up with really interesting uses for it. And there's
a number of species that do it, of which
we are one. So let's call that like the
most even fire potentially could be viewed as neutral
in the sense that it exists in nature. Like
you can just look over in Canada right now
where you're just getting these spontaneous wildfires because of
the heat or when lightning strikes the earth, it
can spark fires so that can exist in. So
we didn't like invent fire. Nature invented fire. We
just figured out how to harness it and then
deliberately create conditions in which fire appears So I
took that thinking and went back to the atomic
bomb thinking and was like, OK, what do we
mean by the atomic bomb? Because there's a whole
process, you don't just start with an atomic bomb,
they're incredibly difficult to build. Thank God uh given
the harm that they can do. So I started
reading honestly, it's like bringing back all these weird
pandemic memories. But I spent like months, months and
months reading about the journey to make that bomb
and the scientists who started out working on it
were not doing it to make a weapon, which
I think is important because what you want to
do is you want to identify where, where from
like the first discovery to the first detonation over
Hiroshima and the Nagasaki, where in that line do
you cross, do you cross a line and it
stops being neutral? So I was like, OK, the
scientists who are just looking to understand what happens
when you bombard uranium, that's just like pure science
and the, the information of that the fact of
that exists in nature or whether or not we
ever discovered it as humans, it would exist because
again, it's, it's, it's physics. So when does it
start to become a weapon? And I identified in
the book that it becomes a weapon in the
mind of a brilliant Hungarian scientist, Leo Solar as
he was walking down the street here in London,
he attended a lecture, I think in 1938 and
he suddenly had this idea of how to do
it. And because he was friends with everyone, he's
an amazing man. His book, Genius In The Shadows.
It's a book about his life is really worth
reading to discover like the networking of science and
how an idea goes from idea to weapon or
hopefully the idea to vaccine or idea to, you
know, wonderful cure that will save us all from
climate change. So he goes and talks to Einstein
about it and because both of them were Central
European and Jewish, which I think is also very
important, they recognize the threat of Hitler far earlier
than their American counterparts did. And they were like
a, you could do this with the scientific information
that we now have about how to split the
atom, you could do this and you could weaponize
it and we think that Hitler will so we'd
better have a plan in place. And because Einstein
was able due to his incredible status as a
Nobel Prize winner to get an audience with the
then US President Franklin Delano Roosevelt, they explained this
to him, laid it out and then FDR green
lit the deal if you will to create what
became the Manhattan project, which ended up involving over
1000 scientists and you know, massive budget and became
a military project and scientists from all over the
world worked on it. So you're like, so was
it FDR that did it because he, he gave
like the political nouse if you will and power
and approval and money. Was it Einstein who like
formed the bridge? Because Leo Solar could have had
the idea. We all have great ideas, but like
that doesn't necessarily lead to them being executed. So
there's like a chain. It was like solar. Einstein
FDRFDR then tasked Ben our Bush who is like
head of all of America's totally cool World War
Two science stuff. Another fascinating person to read about
Robert Oppenheimer. Now subject of a major movie uh
who led, you know, who like literally run the
man project. All of it was absolutely fascinating for
me to like I had to build out the
map of who was working on it. You know,
you could ultimately be like, no, all of these
things could have happened and it actually comes down
to the pilots who flew the plane and dropped
the two bombs because they were the last kind
of line of defense who could have, I don't
know, made an ethical protest and done what many
people wanted by that point, which was a demonstration
of the bomb but not on a human population.
You could have dropped it out in the ocean
to let people see what it was capable of
doing. And hopefully, then that would have made Japan
surrender. That was like an actual idea that was
being put forward. But by that point the new
president, Harry Truman was like, no, we have to
do this because he was given statistics saying if
we don't drop this bomb and the fighting continues
for another 18 months, which were the predictions, however
many people will die and it was in the
millions. So he was weighing up his ethical calculus,
right. And it's easy for all of us to
judge these things now knowing what we know now.
But back then they didn't know and they had
to make a call and they'd already been fighting
war for a really long time. And, you know,
we can argue about that and people do argue
about that until the cows come home. So for
me, I didn't want to argue about it. I
wanted to sort of forensically map it because I
can see it happening again. Uh I can see
it happening in all sorts of different things. And
like, I don't mean in the sense of it's
leading to death. I mean, I, I can see
it happening again in that we are in this
incredible moment of flourishing scientifically and technologically. This is
an, this is an amazing time. Like people will
write about this. I think centuries later from now
that this was like a real turning point moment
in human science and technology evolution. And so what
I'm hoping to do many people are working on
this, I'm just like one tiny little person. But
what I'm hoping to do um as a historian
in training is like, write the history of the
future, which is like, ok, so if, if we've
got a, I now, what can we learn from
the atomic bomb exercise that we just went through?
You? And I here today to understand who's working,
for instance, on A I, although it can also
be genetic engineering, it could be any technology, put
it in the whole point is that it should
work for anything who's working on it. What are
the ethical decisions that are in play? Who has
the power to actually get things done or more
importantly to stop something, right? All of that stuff
and also who doesn't have the power, who's just
on the receiving end of this? Because like, you
know, the atomic crisis, if you will, that resulted
from 1945 I think helped a lot of people
to understand that this is something that affects all
of humanity, but not all of humanity was involved
in the design and deployment considerations. And even with
nuclear arms control, even today, certain countries have a
greater voice in that than others. And that matters
because you hear with people talking about A I
governance and they're like, we should have an international
Atomic Energy Agency like exists today in Vienna to
look at nuclear technology. We should have something like
that for A I. And it's like, well, OK,
let's just check that, that interesting idea. Let's examine
that is the IAE A actually a good example,
a template a model for us to use to
govern A I. And like we need to interview
the people who are working on it and also
their critics and come up with that view, I've
seen some people really dismiss it. You also saw
a bunch of people saying we should have a
CERN for A I research. So cern being the
particle physics laboratory that's based on the French Swiss
border as physicists again from around the world. And
it's public, public science, if you will public interest
science, so you would want to talk with CERN
and be like, OK, like we have an example,
we run the CERN experiment now for, you know,
5060 years. Do you think that's actually relevant and
appropriate if it isn't, could we do better with
an A I research lab? What would that look
like to make it fair equitable? Um REPRESENTATIVE more
democratic. Uh HOW do we factor in things like
climate and biodiversity, which we didn't necessarily in the
early atomic discussions but actually really matter that sort
of thing. So I think there's a lot we
can learn from the history of this found technology
if it's just something that's out there versus something
that you very deliberately set out to make like
an atomic bomb and most of us when we're
making technology or using it or investing in it
uh or buying it are not ever going to
have to face the extremes of an atomic weapon,
but we'll probably be somewhere closer from, we just
found something and we, we like fashioned it or
we're deliberately creating something that's probably more middle of
the road between those two. So that's a really
long example. But I think it's quite important because
you can't really rush through talking about nuclear technology.
Um, AND it matters because now we're having this
big conversation globally about how to regulate A I
and thing that people keep coming back to again
and again and again is the nuclear war threat.
They also cite the pandemic threat given that we've
all just lived through that. I think we all
had a very uh upfront close and personal stress
test of pandemic governance and health governance and bio
laboratory governance, right? Like was this a virus that
was manufactured in the lab? Was it something that
came from nature? Like this is something that's still
being discussed? Scientists are still evolving their views on
that and even if it is something that was
found in nature, it still raises the issue of
these labs, right? And like how the ethics, the
ethics of bioengineering that all comes from World War
Two, all of that thinking medical ethics, all of
it really got an update from World War Two.
So if you want to think about the technologies
of the future, knowing your second World War Science
and technology studies, history from the second World War
onwards I think is essential, right? You know, you
have, you can't, you can't be talking about A
I to today in the abstract, you have to
know we've already seen scientists taking ethical stances and
doctors taking ethical stances. Um, SOME people have said
that A I should be regulated more like the
food and drug agency in the United States. Like
you can't just, you can't just roll out a
drug on the American population. It has to go
through extremely rigorous testing, right? And God forbid when
we're talking about global pharmaceutical manufacturing or global research
um or research on the human body or embryos
and stem cell tissue, right? Like there's entire governance
structures set up for this that come from weirdly
a World War Two starting framework because that's when
we saw not just the potentially positive but also
controversial narrative around atomic weapons, but also a lot
of the Nazi medical experiments and bioresearch experiments, which
were absolutely horrific, right? So all of that thinking
is there. So if you don't know that thinking
you're doing the classic thing that tech people do,
which is like, oh what if we invented this
thing? And you're like, you've invented something that's literally
already existed and that people have been working on
for decades, like do your literature review before you
start talking, right? So classic. So classic,
I mean, let me just ask you one question
about all of what you what you've just said.
So, um, you've talked mostly about nuclear weapons and
you also have the discovery of nuclear fusion, for
example. And uh I, I was wondering if you
think that perhaps certain scientific discoveries themselves might not
be neutral because I, I mean, we could, we
could just say, uh and I'm not pointing fingers
at anyone that studies or studied nuclear fission. I
mean, it's uh as far as I, as I,
as I'm concerned, it's perfectly fine to understand how
atoms work and all of that. And the same
for how genes work, for example. But at the
same time, isn't it the case that uh first
of all people, uh people who are making the
scientific discoveries themselves are people and they have their
own motivations and their work is u usually uh
uh paid for by governments or private institutions. And
that's also not random or usually not arbitrary. I
mean, if they pay for something, they have particular
goals in mind, they want certain developments instead of
others, they want c to work. Why there certain
knowledge instead of some other knowledge? So could it
also, could you think or say that certain scientific
discoveries are themselves not neutral even though they are
just uh just uh uh at first sight producing
useful knowledge or?
Well, I think it's probably important to differentiate between
the discovery and what leads to it. So, back
in the day when I thought that technology was
neutral before I wrote a book of the change
if I was coming from the, the sort of
technology um digital perspective. And I was like, this
is math, this is mathematics and you hear that
a lot um like Gary Kasparov, the chess grandmaster
who wrote a book on A I called Deep
Thinking was like on Twitter a few years ago.
And I cited him in the book saying ethical
A I is like ethical, electricity, like electricity is
just electricity. Like he was kind of like, what
is this uh this argument? And I, I understand
what he means and you see it a lot.
I follow Twitter obsessively and I'm constantly watching people
argue about code is neutral. Math is neutral and
all these people are trying to talk about values,
but math has no values. It's like the universal
language. And I understand that just like a phenomenon
that exists in chemistry or a phenomenon that exists
in physics. Again, putting the atom has like doesn't
care what my politics are or who writes my
paycheck, right? Like it just, it just exists, it's
knowledge. So I think that part is, is neutral,
something that just exists, is neutral in the natural
physical world. That doesn't mean that motivations for seeking
that knowledge out are irrelevant because I think they
are relevant. Uh Absolutely the funding model. I mean,
we're seeing this right now with A I like
most people can't afford to build large language models
there, there's this whole thing of like elite capture
and whether or not we're going to have like
a new monopoly of these things, which is why
we're getting a lot of pushback and some people
are wanting to release them as source. Now. Uh
What data goes into the training sets, all of
this stuff, the intellectual property thereof. Can these things
be audited or not? And should they be particularly
if they're involved in public procurement of any kind?
Um OR like public service use of any kind.
So I think we're sophisticated enough as a species
where we can have this conversation and go if
you are doing something, if you're seeking out knowledge
and doing research on behalf of shareholders for a
company or a private company or the government, governments
are completely value laden. So of course, it matters
if you're doing it for the US government versus
the Chinese government versus let's pick Switzerland which claims
to be neutral, uh an interesting country to tackle
on that claim. Of course, these things matter. So
I feel like we can, we can separate out
the neutrality of the fact like, oh wow, if
you cut off my finger, this is what happens
like a finger being removed from its hand produces
X numbers of physical responses and we can observe
them and describe them forensically and repeat that experiment
and hopefully stop cutting people's fingers off because we've,
we've answered those questions. But why of doing that?
The who of doing that? The, for what purpose
are we going to use that knowledge? Is it,
you know, maybe we're chopping our fingers for a
really good reason. Maybe we're doing it terribly just
to be awful. Like all of those questions are
relevant and matter and we can use them to,
to do science potentially in a more ethical way.
And like, I know that's a really problematic statement
for a lot of people. And it should be,
I'm delighted that it's a problematic statement because it
means that our thinking is like switched on and
we're all going to go. Does that mean to
do more ethical science? What does it mean to
do ethical technology or ethical A I? And we
see that with A I, right. I, I cannot
think of another technology where so many people have
been in such a hurry to claim that it's
trustworthy, responsible, reliable, um ethical, you know, we don't,
we don't feel the need to do that. And
it's because I think people understand we've matured enough
as a species to understand that A I is
inherently not neutral, that we have to rush out
to brand it as trustworthy or responsible because people
are terrified. And there's, you know, there's a reason
for that. There are some really scary uses, you
could put this technology to. So you need to
reassure people up front that, you know, we're just
using it for I don't know, whatever it is.
People want to be using it for, uh, it
seems to me again, largely for advertising and marketing
but there's a lot more, you know, drug discovery
would be a great one. But even then, even
then there could be, we could discover some really
trippy stuff with that and it's gonna be, you
know, what do we do with it? What do
we do with that knowledge? You can't unknow something
once you know it. Mhm.
Yeah. Uh, BUT I mean, uh, explain a little
bit better why in certain instances, technology A I
systems, for example, can be biased. I mean, they
can have, for example, sexual racial bias or biases
of any other kind because there are people that,
uh, particularly when it comes, for example, to how
certain police departments in the US use systems to,
uh, fight against crime, I guess in that way.
And, uh, pe people, uh, just rely on the
data, those systems generate and they say, oh, you're
just feeding them data and they are processing the
data and then they help, uh, the police. Uh,
uh, I, I mean, when it comes to, uh,
they have limited resources and they have in terms
of when, when it comes for them to decide
which particular areas they should police more or less.
So it's not biased at all. It's just, uh,
computer processing data. But I, I mean, that's not
really the case. Oh,
no. I mean, it's totally biased. It is completely
biased and like that's the tricky thing. So you're
right to highlight things like facial recognition technology because
that's going to be regulated under the EU A
I Act. And this whole question of, can you
just have real time identity surveillance? Right. So people
walking around like you see in the movies and
you and I'd be walking down the street in
a little square with a pair above our head
and it would be like, Stephanie her, you know,
Ricardo Lopez are walking down the street going into
a coffee shop and they would have like our
height and our weight and our eye color, but
potentially more, you know how we voted in our
last election, whether or not one of us has
credit cards and um you know, pick your, pick
your, your fantasy information profile about yourself or your
nightmare all about your political, you know, our sexuality,
uh you know, last last pornography was looked at
yesterday, right? Because all that stuff is being tracked,
all of it's being track. Um So yes, that
exists, it's there. The eu is looking to take
a position not to do that. We use it
here in the United Kingdom where I'm talking to
you from the London Metropolitan Police loves facial recognition
technology um for reasons that are really bewildering because
it doesn't seem to improve their performance at all,
but they insist on using it. Um Despite parliament
asking them repeatedly not to. But that's what happens
when you don't pass laws making something, you know,
banned or controlling it. You just go, please don't
do it and the police just ignore it. In
the US. We've done a really different approach with
that, which is that certain cities or towns or
states have put into law rules about using it
or not using it and who can use it?
Is it the cops or do you also need
to regulate private sector use? Because one thing you
could do is you could ban the police from
using it but allow the private sector to carry
on because remember, we must upset the private sector
in the US. But the problem is the police
can then just work around that and buy the
data or sometimes just get it for free. But
you know why get it for free when someone
can make money off of it. Uh You can
buy the data from a third party data broker
legally. So they're still getting the data and we
see this with Amazon Ring is a great example
of this. Uh PEOPLE putting all those doorbells up
needing, needing to identify everybody have no idea that
that footage can actually just be taken by the
cops with nothing bumping it. So like well done
for participating in a surveillance society in your neighborhood.
Uh It's just, you know, it's just happening. So
that question sounds like well, so what? Nothing to
hide, nothing to fear. Right. Like I'm not doing
anything wrong. I don't care if I'm being observed.
I hear this all the time and it's like,
ok, cool. But the problem is that this technology
tends to perform better on men with lighter skin
and worst on women with darker skin. So we've
had a number of wrongful arrests in the United
States in which the police have used facial recognition
technology to make arrests like as part of their
arrest process and they have misidentified people who were
innocent. So these people get subject to really traumatic
arrests often in front of their family, they might
be held in custody for, you know, 36 92
hours, something horrific. Um, AND anybody who hasn't, you
know, who thinks, oh, that's not so bad has
obviously never been in a US police custody situation.
It's not, not something you would do voluntarily. Um,
NO disrespect to law enforcement. It's just, it's not,
it's not nice to be treated as a suspected
criminal and particularly if you're innocent. And then there's
also the problem that there's no legal requirement in
the United States when you are, you know, when
you've been arrested and brought to trial, you don't
have to be told there's no requirement to protect
you telling you that facial recognition was used in
your arrest, which is really problematic for technology that
doesn't work very well. So that all of that
is really bad, but then people will go. Ok,
cool. So what we have to do to fix
all of those, you know, acknowledge risks. It's really
bad. Let's just pump it full of more data.
Refine, refine, refine and get to a tool that
works. It's never going to work 100% of the
time, but like with high degree of accuracy, 99%
of accuracy. So you're like, all right, if you
solve the accuracy problem, have you solved the problem
of facial recognition? I personally have argued that you
do not why? Because now you've got your cameras
that apparently are pretty accurate everywhere because and we've
seen this um in the US is a great
case in point. It isn't just the cops who
want it. People are like, well, I I don't
feel very confident we've got high gun crime in
the United States or we're in schools or fill
in the blank, whatever your personal security concerns are,
I'm going to get a camera and put it
everywhere. So now imagine a United States in which
private individuals have cameras in their homes. Every business
has cameras, cities get in on the act because
like we got, you know, we'll do this to
fight crime and you now have it where people
are being surveyed nonstop. You would actually have to
almost flip it and say, where are they not
being surveyed? Right? And where is that data not
being kept recorded? Traded? You know who owns the
cameras. So here in the UK, we have a
problem that a lot of the CCTV cameras that
we have all over this country are very awkwardly
sourced from China. And so a big campaign has
gone to rip them out uh because this is
now finally, finally being deemed to be a security
risk. And then the question becomes ok. So is
it the fact that the camera is made by
a Chinese company? Is that the security risk or
is the act of having these cameras up at
all a security risk? Like, would you feel more
comfortable if the camera making it was a British
company? Right? And I think a lot of people
to be completely frank would they would be fine
with that. Um For them, the issue is, it's
a, it's a known hostile power. I mean, China
has been identified as a great one of the
national security risks to the UK. So you get
into these situations where you can just tell nobody
thought this through because, and you always have to
do this. And again, this is like my historian
training, you have to always imagine whatever system you're
building in your peaceful, liberal democratic happy country being
weaponized if somebody gets elected, who is awful. Now,
the classic example would be like, what if Hitler
had all of this tech, right? But you know,
let's not give that man any more um time
and attention that he's already had. You don't have
to go back to World War Two to look
at examples of countries that have become increasingly um
how can we say this, you know, cracking down
on women's reproductive rights that happened in the United
States right now, right? Like we don't, we don't
have to go to World War Two. We can
literally just open the newspaper today and see that
women who need to get abortions or to go
to an abortion clinic or a reproductive clinic simply
to get health advice are now being criminalized in
several US states. As are the people that help
them, their friends, their mothers, whatever. And that was
something that has always been a threat. But then
I think most people, if you had said before,
Roe versus Wade was, was challenged um successfully. If
you had told them this could be a risk,
they would have looked at you like you were
some crazy feminist. Well, here you are crazy feminist.
It's happened, it's happened. And so you've got your
phone data, all of your internet data, right? So
Facebook has had problems. Meta has had problems because
they've been handing over data to cops, to arrest
women who need to go and get an abortion.
And if you had told somebody that when Facebook
came on the scene in the mid two thousands,
they would not have believed you. I'm sure that
Mark Zuckerberg and his designing crew never thought that
that would be a risk because no one imagined
the US political context changing in that way. You
can imagine it with the Lbgtqi A plus community
which again is constantly under threat, not just in
the US, but like everywhere, in terms of their
right to get married, their right to adopt, um
just their right to not be like harassed and
persecuted on the street. You are now going to
have all of this surveillance equipment that potentially can
be put in the hands of a democratically elected
government that is bad, right? And bad in the
sense of like would prosecute them, persecute them. And
that's, you know, that's my view. That's bad. I
know there's people that would disagree with that and
I don't care.
I bet, I bet that the Center in Florida
would love that. Yeah.
No, they absolutely would love it. They would love
it. So, like, you just, you have to design
for that in mind and that's where like sci
fi training and like a very good, healthy uh
background in literature and cinema can be really helpful
because it helps you to imagine scenarios that will
seem crazy at the time and be like, yeah,
but what if, how many steps away or again,
like, and that's why one of the chapters in
my book is, where do you draw the line?
I'm like, how many steps do you have before
your liberal democracy turns into like fascism or simply
authoritarianism? Or like a Christian theocracy or whatever, it
doesn't have to be Christian. It could be any
religion. But like that matters and those rights that
we have in so many liberal democracies are so
precious and they have been so fought and hard
won and they're also so easily taken away. And
that's where you must know your history because if
you don't know history, someone will say, yeah. But
you know, you're just worrying about nothing and you
need to be able to go. No, this has
already happened or it happened in this way. And
actually here in this case, we're only, you know,
it would only take two or three steps for
us to enter that world. So how do I
design for that? I mean, a really good strategist
and a really good technology designer, technology ethicist can't
simply rely on a technological background. You must have
the social sciences and you know, liberal arts and
humanities training as well. I think it's one of
the toughest jobs to do actually. And that's no
disrespect to engineering colleagues or more sort of classically
trained stem colleagues. Their, their work is also extremely
challenging and difficult. But there there's something especially hard
about the human component, right? People don't use things
that necessarily the way they were intended or they
modify them because again, it's just in our nature.
So you have to always design with the worst
in mind. And that means you have to have
incredible knowledge and a really good imagination and like
a humility to think about your own blind spots,
right? Which is why you don't want monocultural teams.
You have to have people with really different experiences
and those different views have to be really respected
because those people will help you see risk that
you would just miss you. You won't hear it,
you won't see it. You need somebody else who's
like, I know what this is like because I
am of this community or I'm from this country
and I saw this or my, my country lived
through this. Um That's, that's a tough one.
But uh you mentioned uh sci-fi there. Uh And
I mean, I, I understand all of your arguments
but II, I have to say that at least
to some extent and unless I'm un I'm misunderstanding
what you're saying there about sci fi, I might
have some issue with people uh real uh looking
into or relying on. I don't know, something that
is portrayed in a sci fi movie or sci
fi book when it comes to uh worrying about
the potential dangers of technology A I or something
like that. Because um I mean, for example, if
you think that uh the things you should be
worried about are I don't know, a terminator like
scenarios or West world like scenarios where technology suddenly
becomes sentient and develops their own uh motives and
goals and all of that and suddenly wants to
wipe out humanity or perhaps, uh, the next day
we have to be worried about, uh, mistreating, uh
A I systems because they might be sentient and
all of that. I mean, I just worry that,
uh, if people take those kinds of scenarios too
seriously, they might distract, that might help distract them
from the actual more realistic issues that might derive
from technology. You know? I mean, do you understand
what I'm worried about here? I
completely understand it. And that's been a concern that
a lot of people have raised in the past
couple of months ever since people started writing those
letters saying we should have a pause and A
I research and warning of the different risks that
it presents on an existential societal level. And that
group of people who are worried about existential risks
of A I have been accused of worried about
something that may never happen because it's not really
a I that they're worried about, they're worried about
artificial general intelligence, which is a different beast in
the sense that that's, that's the moment that again,
it's hypothetical, it has not happened and it may
never happen. But in theory, it's the moment when
smart machines become smarter than human beings. I love
how I said that and the dog just that's
hilarious. The robot dog, um smart machines, when, when
these machines become more intelligent than us as a
species and like, what would they do to us
is the big fear and there is a concern
that that's distracting from what I guess you could
call now. Risks, risks you could have now, risks
or
even near future
quite of, you know, it's either it's happening now
and here is, you know, the risk of discrimination
in like how A I is used in healthcare,
how A I is used in the medical or
sorry, the legal profession or risks of misinformation and
disinformation in terms of elections and journalism and like
public confidence in the integrity of how the the
citizen state relationship works. That's
all happening or selling your online data, for example,
selling your online data, gathering your data. I mean,
like literally a month doesn't go by when meta
isn't being fined for some sort of data violation
and they just, you know, they just price it
in and everybody is there. It's incredible to me,
but they do. Um So that's all happening now
and then you're right to identify like near term
risks, which is like we're not quite there as
a risk.
Perhaps a good example, perhaps a good example of
that would be certain genetic engineering technologies. I mean,
we're not really there yet, but it's probably in
the near future. So
yeah, you could come up with, I'm sure a
number of different categories to kind of like, you
know, make columns if you will. So definitely need
to worry about this now because it's already happening
likely to happen soon, but we're not there yet.
And here's the conditions that we would have to
fulfill to get there versus like may never happen.
But if they did call them low probability, high
impact events, um egag I takes over um and
what will they do to us and turn us
into slaves or something? So, you know, is that
distracting is your question? I think, I don't know.
First of all, I don't think that you're going
to get, I don't think it's like helpful to
tell people not to think about something because they're
going to think about it. It's like, you know,
that, that experiment of don't think of the white
polar bear. You know, as I'm telling you to
do this, your brain is like all I can
think of is a white polar bear. So I
think, I think first of all, it's actually probably
I'm not the cognitive psychologist, but my guess would
be the easiest thing to do is actually to
name it. Like do what we just did be
like, there's these different types of risks. The one
that the media really loves to go for is
the one that's actually the least likely why do
they like to go for it? Because it's great
storytelling. We've actually, we've literally seen this movie before.
So I talk with clients a lot and I've
got a presentation that I've been using the past
couple of months that it is really like driven
people wild in a good way that is looking
at cinema and we talk about the different ways
that A I appears in cinema over time and
it's so effective because you have, you can't have
a conversation about A I without naming Terminator, you
just can't. So I make it the first slide.
I'm like, let's, let's name it, let's dismantle it
and deconstruct it like a bomb, you know, take
it apart and neutralize it if you will and
then talk about why it's so resonant. Everybody has
a really good laugh and this kind of like
looks around like, you know, I'm not the only
one who thinks about Terminator. No, we all think
about Terminator. Why is that? And then you move
on, you would maybe talk about the matrix, you
might talk about Blade Runner. Um You can talk
about Westworld, you could talk about black mirror, right?
So you go through all the different things that
are in popular culture and you also look at
the imagery, right? So it's not just the story,
it's the picture. So like the Terminator, what's quite
terrifying about the Terminator is he's both human. Uh
ALTHOUGH he's like a superman, she's, it's Arnold Schwarzenegger,
but he's also when he like rips off all
of his fleshy bits. He is made the designer
who is very cleverly in the movie, made it
to look like a human technological skeleton. So it's
like a metal head. It's literally a metal skull
and it has teeth, like it has actual human
teeth and you're like, why, like, why does it
need human teeth? It's a robot. It does not
need. So what is that about? And the reason
is because it's terrifying, right? It's really scary. If
you saw that when you were a kid, you
were like unable to not ever see it again.
So you have to think about why that is
or like the image of um like a human
hand kind of going like that to another human
hand. And it's, it's, it's riffing off of Michelangelo's
Sistine chapel, right of God touching Adam and giving
the spark of life. And you'll see that, that
image a lot when we talk about A I
because it's a really useful shorthand visually for us
to think about, you know, God God, something that
people call like God in the judeo-christian sense with
that picture created humans. And so then they'll riff
on it and you'll see another image of a
human hand touching a robot finger, right? Like it's
going like that. And then in this case, humans
have become God and the robot is our creation.
And that taps into one of the best science
fiction films of all time or movies or books
around of all time, which is of course, Mary
Shelley's Frankenstein, like this idea that you can, you
can create it and then it goes rogue and
it's a fascinating piece of literature uh that I
think captured something in, again humans because we create
things all the time and it's this sort of
primal fear of what happens when our creations come
back and like kill us, which probably actually is
about like parents with their Children, right? Like it's
in a really demented way. But I'm talking, I'm
talking subconscious stuff, right? Stuff that works across all
societies that there's that fear of your creation getting
out of control because that, that's a narrative that
we know we recognize it uh across time. So
you have to, I think you actually, it's a
wasted amount of energy to tell people don't think
about these things. It's distracting. I think it's actually
more effective to think about it right up front.
Name it have a chat together, build everybody's critical
thinking and images on the news. Whenever you talk
about A I, I do a lot of work
with the media. When I go on television, it
will be a split screen. It will be me
talking about A I with a bunch of books
in the background, hopefully saying intelligent things and then
the images that they put on the other side
of the screen to illustrate A I are like
on drugs, they're like hallucinatory acid trips. It'll be
like it'll be like a light sort of floating.
You know, like when people say they, they almost
die and they have like a near death experience,
they're in a, they're in a white tunnel going
towards the light, they'll show something like that, then
they'll show like a video game graphic of a
human head from the neck up. That's completely translucent.
You can see right through it. And inside is
a human brain glowing orange and it's like rotating
around and it's like floating on a magic carpet,
like a video game version of a magic carpet.
Why? Because I'm assuming it's because they're like, oh
if we're talking about artificial intelligence, we have to
show what do we think of intelligence, you think
of a brain? So we'll show the, we'll show
the viewers a brain but like a like a
sci fi version of a brain. It's not like
an actual brain because an actual brain is a
bit gross, right? It's sort of the biological wet
thing. So they show you instead an abstraction of
a brain and then they might show the finger
image, right? Like they, they riff on weird stuff
and once you see this or you'll see like
lots of zeros and ones raining down, right? Like
in the matrix. And there's a reason for that.
They're not, this is not an accident. These things
are highly iconic images from the films and shows
that we've all seen. So they become a visual
shorthand. So you can't, I just think you can't
ignore this stuff. I think you actually have to
go right at it straight at it. Discuss it
and then you can if you want per it
and go, let's actually look at the stuff that
is perhaps less visually sexy, right? Less visually interesting
to show which is going to be predictive policing
algorithms, facial recognition, technology discrimination. Um BANKS using A
I to decide if you can get a mortgage
or not. Right? Like that, that is less sci-fi
sexy. It's less scary, but it's actually most people's
experience of A I. So that's fascinating. Most people
don't realize how A I is already being used
on them, right? Like I think they would be
appalled if they did. So that's, I think the
media's challenge and the challenge of writers and analysts
and people are trying to educate the public is
like you're going to need a visual iconography if
you will a visual language and you're going to
need a narrative language for storytelling that makes those
real risks, risks that are right now as compelling
as the ones that are more hypothetical, but that
we've all been seeing in shows and movies for
decades now. Right? So it's a, again, so many
things with technology are actually about culture, right? They're
about the human relationship with technology. So like getting
people involved and caring about something like A I
which, you know, we're in a cost of living
crisis here in the UK, good luck going out
onto the streets of Brazil. I guess the Portugal
getting people to care, I guess that across the
entire room we're living through a cost of living
crisis.
Yeah. Right. So, if you're like, you know, do
you want to have this chat? People are like,
no, because I'm too busy, like, dealing with massive
inflation or, like very high interest rates or unemployment
or climate change, like, you know, half of Europe
as we were just discussing under a massive heat
dome and sweltering away. So, getting them to think
about A I is tricky. So you have to
help them, you have to make that really easy
for them to do. And so that's where I
really enjoy this kind of work because I've noticed
the effect that it has on people when you
take them through some of the concepts that we've
just been discussing is they're like, oh my God,
I see this everywhere. Now I see those images
everywhere. I see. The media loves to go to
some stories and then not to others. Why is
that? You have to look at their incentive structure.
What do they get measured on clicks, viewing figures,
et cetera. So the scarier they can make the
story. So why any time Elon Musk does everything,
the media loves it because it's, he's there in
some sort of symbiotic relationship, right? He says something
outrageous, they cover it and go, isn't it outrageous?
He then is like, I hate the press, you
know, the world weirdest dysfunctional relationship ever. But people
who are doing like really important work on A
I are not getting that kind of media coverage,
right? And they maybe don't talk the way that
Elon Musk talks, they won't give examples or say
things that are really outrageous to get attention. If
you're a really measured, considered scientist or researcher, you're
not going to say something that's very Clickbait.
Yeah. And by the way, since you mentioned that,
let's talk a little bit more about social media
because it's not only the misinformation issue but also
in terms of these discussions surrounding the supposed neutrality
of technology. I mean, if you just look at
social media, it's ply obvious that there's no neutrality
there at all because I, I mean, even what
you get mostly exposed to, it's just what they
decide to boost to get more views, clicks, likes
whatever and usually it's the most outrageous stuff out
there, right?
And lies. I mean, there's fascinating research about how
lies spread much faster than facts on the internet
and like, yeah, now we're in this world where
so much of it can be faked. Um NOT
just imagery and video footage but sound audio. So
you're going to have this thing where people are
going to find it very, very difficult to know
what is real and not real. I don't know,
I sometimes think that we may be approaching if
not the end of social media, it definitely a
new phase. Um Are, you know, do people do
people really want to go online and see their
friends talking about holidays and babies and lunch, which
was a lot of how social media was from
the mid two thousands onward. And now it seems
to be kind of invaded by content creators, you
know, influencers and the like, and then if you
start feeling like, oh my God, if I go
on, it's actually manipulating me, that's not good either.
And there's all the mental health research of, you
know, lots of people who spend time on social
media end up feeling really depressed or anxious. Um,
AND it can feel really toxic for many, many
people just to go on. It could be awful.
I just wonder, I don't know. I'm, I'm thinking
aloud here, but I do wonder if there's just
going to be a bunch of people for whom
this start to just feel really irrelevant because it's
kind of like, I don't know the way that
television, I just came back from the US and
I'm always just stunned by American television. Now, the
amount of advertising that you are just bombarded with
and it's, you know, if you're not used to
it, if you are in a country where you
don't have a lot of advertising in your TV,
you just kind of look at your American family
and friends and you're like, you're just being like
brainwashed with all of this all the time and
that's how social media feels like my Twitter feed
feed. Since Elon Musk took over, it's just full
of,
no, but since you talk about that, about American
television, let me just tell you that I'm a
wrestling fan and so I watch wrestling mostly from
the US, of course, because it's the, the biggest
place for wrestling in the world. But, uh, I
mean, I, I really notice that, uh, if you
watched wrestling, like, 20 years ago you would have
the matches and then a few breaks with advertisements
and all of that. But, but now you get
split screens where there's, uh, uh, a tiny window
with the match and then next, with the advertisement.
And I'm like, oh man, I want to watch
the match. I don't care about pizzas and burgers
and whatever. Let me change.
I thought when I go to the cinema and
it's like, I'm just here to see the movie
and ideally the previews and I feel like I
pay quite a lot to go to the cinema
and then you have to sit through, you know,
20 minutes of adverts, but then you work it
out and so you just show up later, right?
So if you want, there's ways, there's always ways
of hacking, there's probably some way of like hacking
your wrestling channel to only see the WS about
the ads. But I just, I guess I'm just
saying that I feel like these things evolve and
like social media for a while clearly had some
sort of utility. It helps people feel connected clearly.
But then it started to have, what would you
call it if it's not utility? I was gonna
say negative utility. But, you know, again, like, it
has a cost to it and I guess you're
constantly weighing up in life. Is the pain worth
the pleasure. Right. Like, is it, is it full?
And I just think for a lot of people,
I mean, I've heard constantly is this the end
of Twitter? And like, I'm very mixed because I
use Twitter for instance, for my work quite a
lot. But part of me was like, maybe the
best thing that could happen to me is that
Twitter, like, failed and tried because I'm not on
other than linkedin, I'm not on any other social
media channel. I managed to like, break all of
those addictions and habits from my youth. Um, Twitter
is like the last holdout and in a way
it would just do me a huge favor if
it just wasn't even an option, which is a
really, that, that's a weird feeling to have. On
the one hand, I miss the old days of
Twitter because I had a lot of fun. I
made amazing contacts and friends on it and it
was really helpful to me for my work. But
I do feel that it's, it's just, it's not
a very nice place. It's like going into, I
was in Frankfurt airport a couple of weeks ago
and they have like an old fashioned smoking lounge
in the airport and it's like a glass cage
for smokers. And if you're a non smoker, which
I am you're walking by, you see all these
people in, you know what looks basically like a
cancer room. You know, they all smoking and like,
you just look at them and you're like, my
God, it's expensive. It's dangerous. It's stinky. Like you,
you're going to come out of there. Absolutely reeking.
It's
a, but the, but like the compassion kicks in
because it's one of the hardest addictions to kick.
But, but rarely do you see it that way?
And I kind of wonder if we're getting to
the point where, where some people can either see
themselves in the social media equivalent of the smoking
lounge in Frankfurt Airport and be like, why are
you doing this to yourself? Like if these things
make you feel so bad, why do you go
on them if you feel the news is unreliable
or you just get shouted out by crazy people
you've never met? Why are you signing up for
an emotional beating? Like there's other ways to get
your news that are probably more reliable and that
don't involve that. So, you know, all of us
I think are going to have a real and
probably are already having, um, a sort of reckoning
with a new relationship. And I think that could
be a real challenge for the social media companies
is if you just got a mass movement of
people who were like, you know what, this isn't
worth it anymore. Yeah, that's hard.
But by the way, uh related to that about
collecting data online and selling people's data because there
are people out there that are perhaps still not
sold on this idea that they should care about
this because they're just like, oh, come on, I
go on the internet and I go on Facebook
and just, uh, see some of the news and
uh share a few silly stuff. I mean, uh
stuff related to my vacation or something like that,
my kids and perhaps I watch some vanilla porn
and go on Amazon and buy some stuff. I
mean, what, what's the big deal with their collecting
that, that date, uh uh uh the, the, the
update and then selling it to other people? I
mean, I'm not doing anything bad than with the
I, I'm not overwhelmed on the internet with ads
that I don't really care about because they're also
catering to the things that, that I tend to
like. So what's the big deal there?
So there's so many ways we could tackle that.
I guess one that I would start out with
is like, can they imagine like, can they literally
conceive of a world in which they aren't having
all of their data gathered? Because like, that's an
option, right? That's a design choice. That we've all
made, we could have a world in which you
can't track me from site to site to site
or which third party brokers aren't, are like, just
not allowed to exist much less traffic in our
data for profit. Um And it's true like I
struggle with this because I think most people have
just priced in that they're going to have their
data involved in a data hack or leak at
some point. And like, what's the worst that happens
to them is maybe a little bit of casual
identity theft, perhaps a bit of fraud, uh which
hopefully their banks will cover, right? So if you
look at where the incentives are to care about
this, I don't know how much it is on
the individual banks care about it because they want
to stop fraud. Um Governments care about it because
they also need to stop identity fraud for all
sorts of security reasons. But like do individuals care
and I I'm with you. I think the example
that you just gave of the person who's like
going through the journey of sharing their data is
kind of a personal preference. Um At this point,
some people really care about it. Other people don't,
I think you could make it more of like
a consumer protection competition issue to say I don't
even really have a choice so I might care
about it. But the regulators aren't doing a good
enough job because there's no way for me to
have options to choose to create an online experience
for myself because I have to be online that
doesn't involve this. But there's also the whole factor.
The whole question in mind of so much of
how we've allowed everything to work is for free,
but it isn't really for free because your data
is the, is the product that's being trafficked and
traded for a profit. If you remove that, do
I have to pay to compensate for it? Right.
So if I want to have ad free listening
on my favorite podcast, that option exists, but I
have to join the podcast and pay a subscription
because fair enough the podcast creators like have bills
to pay as well and they're like, listen, we
either get paid from ads or subscription, you decide.
And like, that's what was interesting with Twitter is
I think Elon Musk tried to go down that
path by getting people to pay, you know, 8
a month to be verified because he was, he
was saying he wanted to do it that way,
which was slightly flawed because Twitter's revenue model was
largely advertising based as it is for indeed most
of the platforms. And the subscription model doesn't really
seem to work with any of those. And it's
also really difficult to get people to pay for
something they've had for free for a really long
time. Howls of protest. Uh People don't even want
to pay for good journalism. So you'll constantly see
people bitching online going. This article is behind a
paywall. Not understanding. I guess they don't understand the
cost of good journalism and not like reporters have
to be paid. Editors have to be paid. Uh,
THEY just, they just want it for free. So
people always want stuff for free and they won't
pay for it. So I think in that case
for, for the majority of people like that, they
won't care. And I'm not, to be honest, I'm
not even sure that they should care, which is
a controversial statement to make because they have almost
no power to get it fixed. I think the
people who do have power and who do care
who have like an incentive to care are the
big companies looking to bust fraud and they lobby
like mad. So they could actually lobby for a
safer internet if they wanted to. And in fact,
instead what they're doing is just upping the amount
of, you know, anti fraud protections that you would
have to use when you're doing online banking. For
instance, you might get like a, you know, you'll
buy something online and then you'll get a code
to your phone from your bank checking that you
actually wanted to make this purchase, right? Like that's
a new mechanism or getting people to have multi
factor authentication to check that it's really them doing
something. So we haven't, we haven't come up with,
with a way around this. And I think that's
because again, the ultimate extreme example of risk is
you build this massive surveillance capitalism model or the
Chinese social system, social credit system model of surveillance
in the liberal democratic world. We haven't yet had
unfortunately a pretty grim test run which would be
a bad government getting elected into power who then
weaponizes all of the information that's gathered on all
of us. And because humans seem to need to
see risks before they can decide to. Then, oh
God, we better fix that and make sure that
doesn't happen again. It's very difficult for them to
think ahead and prevent something from happening. I don't
see that going away anytime soon. It would be
really nice if we did because honestly, the cost
to society of fraud and identity theft is massive
and we have a new generation, new generation uh
that's been coming on really since the early two
thousands, who all of their life so much of
their life, more than any other human in history
is online. So the, the risk is not proportionate
if you're a baby boomer and the majority of
your life is not online. If your generation z
almost all of it is or not all of
it. That's unfair. That's an exaggeration. Um, LET'S just
call it.
Well, I mean, I can tell you, I can
tell you that I have a little brother who
is 10 years, 10 years younger than me. And
he's basically lived with internet his entire life. I
mean, I started using internet when I was 9,
10 years old, but he lived with internet, been
posting pictures of them for years, you know, that
they have an internet presence that they weren't even
aware of. I mean, that you can create all
sorts of existential um, angst and emotional problems about
privacy and sharing and who's, who has to share
your image or your story or your information. That's
probably another reason that we haven't really evolved yet
is I think when as that generation comes of
age and they are coming of age now, um
and only will continue to do so, they may
have different views on this. Whereas I think for
the baby boomers and possibly generation X even who
are largely in positions of power, it hasn't affected
them as much. It'd be interesting like to talk
with your little brother or indeed anybody who's of
that younger generation to feel. I think they are
really different notions of privacy and culture around sharing
and consent. So on the one hand, they have
less privacy, but I think they're also much more
alive to this question of consent and what that
means and why the consent model doesn't even always
work. I still though I still come down to,
I think it's a very old school problem. I
think regulators have really failed on competition because if
you don't want to be tracked by Facebook, um,
across the internet. It just doesn't matter that the,
the regulatory fines, well, they can pay the fines
like that. That model has to be updated to
deal with giants who can afford to pay fines
and actually really happy to do that. As long
as you don't interfere with their operating model, what
we actually have to do is make it so
that it can't do that legally in the first
place. You know, if Mark Zuckerberg literally faced criminal
charges and could like do jail time for that,
I'm sure he would change his model, but since
he just has to write a check,
yeah, I mean, because those fines, they don't hurt
their profits at all. Let's be real
completely. I mean, in fact, I still remember with
horror, the FTC had issued what was then the
biggest fine against Facebook for privacy violations and Facebook
share price went up, didn't hurt them, it went
up. Why did it go up? It went up
because people had been worried that the FTC might
actually take action on their data gathering practices, but
they didn't. So they were like super, if you're,
if you're telling me that all you're going to
do is find me, then I can build that
into my financial modeling, call it, call it a
tax pay it and carry on which is what
they do. And so that's going to be, the
question is like, we were talking about threads with,
with meta coming up with this new social media
platform to rival Twitter and the like. And I
was fascinated by how many people signed up and
we're talking about it. It was like, have you
forgotten who is behind all of this? These are
the same people who were complaining when Francis Hagen
blew the whistle on mental health abuses by Facebook
Instagram on Children. And they're the same people who
freaked out when Facebook was involved with Cambridge Analytica
in rigging the US election in 2016. You know,
all thinking that Mark Zuckerberg is, is awful. But
as soon as he put this out because he's
not Elon Musk and it became the thing like
they had a total memory wipe and they, and
they all signed up not thinking, I wonder why
this isn't allowed to be released in the European
Union yet, right? So like we were just talking
about the fact that you can't get it there
because the amount of data that threads harvests is
huge and we know that these people are not
going to be using it for good, they're using
it for profit and yet people signed up. So
like that was again, as a a technology ethicist,
I was fascinated because I was like all that
you can give people all the information in the
world and they will still make bad choices. It's
just not, it's not enough to give them information
and it's not enough to remind them again and
again and again, that need to have a social
media life, uh seems to be really strong in
a lot of people. We saw it first with
Mastodon, then we saw the blue sky now its
threads like it's, it's this thing and it never
seems to get the critical mass that, that may
have changed by the time this podcast go out,
um they'll have a spike in early adoption and
then it kind of falls off. And that's what
I mean about kind of looking to the long
term is like, are people actually going to want
this? Because what, what need does it serve and
is the price too high to pay? Yeah, very
fascinating. But I don't know.
But by the way, since uh earlier, you mentioned
that you wrote your book during the COVID-19 pandemic,
I would also like to ask you what, what
is your idea about uh some of the digi
digital health tools that were used during the COVID-19
pandemic because of course, we were dealing with a
major health issue and perhaps even if there with
some data collection, uh I, I mean, it, it
would still be ethical to do that. The pros
would outweigh the cons because of the threat we
were dealing with. But what do you think about
uh some of the data that were potentially collected
by, I guess governments mostly during that period?
It's interesting, isn't it like we haven't really had
all of the different countries that built that kind
of health surveillance tech if you will um come
out as a group, I don't mean individually but
as a group or through the auspices of the,
who the World Health Organization to say, like if
we have another pandemic, God forbid in, you know,
a few years time, is this a tool that
we want to have in our toolbox Eg was
it effective or not? And not only was it
effective? Was it worth it? Which is a different
question? Um The UK has had some studies that
came out arguing that it reduced transmission. But II
I still question some of that because we can't
really run a couple of other sort of counterfactual
experiments. Like what, what would it be like if
we hadn't used it? There's a lot of problems
still with some of the things that I cook.
And I also just think I interviewed loads of
doctors while I was writing that chapter and none
of them were asking for this. Like this was
not the tool, this was not the mitigation that
they need, that they felt they needed. Um The
most effective mitigations were the lockdowns unfortunately. And then
obviously the big one was vaccines, but doctors weren't
calling for this. It really felt for me like
a solution in search of a problem in the
sense that this massive crisis happened. Technologists wanted to
do something investors saw a potential to make money
from it and like, Voila, let's go for it.
And you saw in the case of Singapore, um,
they said at first we, you know, we're making
this mandatory, but don't worry, we're going to collect
data that we would never use for like a
criminal policing aspect. We're only using it for public
health and of course they did use it for
the criminal policing aspect. So, like, not a surprise,
like, saw that one coming a mile away. And
absolutely, I think the UK would have done it.
I mean, we've seen, unfortunately, we're going through our
COVID inquiry now and it's been pretty grim, the
behavior of people in power. Uh, CERTAINLY within our
current government, a lot of the ministers who were
not following their own laws or, you know, they
were, the police were really clamping down and there
was like a certain people were more heavily policed
than others and there was a racial, ethnic class
component to that, right. So you do that and
then you put technology solutions on top of that.
I just think you're going to create some really
serious problems. The parliament hadn't really created pandemic legislation
in place to deal with it. And part of
the reason, um, I put my book out in
February of 2022 and that was because I was
in my poor publishers. I was like, we have
to wait because they started passing legislation I think
it was to remember now, the last order England
was the last one to create a legal framework
to allow these, to allow these apps which had
already been in existence for like a year at
that point, maybe even more. Um They didn't have
a legal framework for it though in the four
nations of the United Kingdom until starting in September
of 2021. And then England was the last one
in December of 2021. So I was typing against
the clock because I wanted to capture that before
we went to press uh and put it out
to show really, the UK had, had completely changed
its position. We used to be a country that
was super proud of not having identity cards and
all of a sudden in this case, we did
and we've also put them in for voting now,
by the way, like massive cultural shift here, not
without protest. So they did that. And then within
like two months of England passing that law, they
basically were like, we're not using the app anymore.
Why? Because it wasn't like it wasn't effective, it
was not what, what was needed. So we did
all of this mass, you know, they blew a
huge amount of political capital and wasted loads of
time on something that they in the end themselves
decided it wasn't going to be a requirement. And
what was really awful in that is they kept
lying about it. So they kept saying, hey, we're
not building it when they were secretly building it,
then they were like, well, we're building it but
it's not going to be mandatory and blah, blah,
blah. So each time they kind of destroyed public
trust, which is essential in something like a national
crisis or international crisis, like a pandemic. So, you
know, my takeaway for what it's worth and stuff
like that is, you know, a I'm not convinced
it was worth it scientifically and medically, it wasn't
what healthcare professionals certainly were calling for. Um The
risks are super high in terms of potential for
abuse and they blew so much political and social
trust and that matters in a democracy because if
we, you know, I guarantee you, if we go
again into another pandemic, a lot of people are
going to remember all the lying that government did
trust matters when you're handing over data, trust matters.
If you're doing surveillance and trust matters in terms
of health and because you, you're talking to people
about their bodies, ultimately, you know, you play with
that with your peril. So that for me was
the real learning point was like, how do I
create trust in the scientific method in health care?
You're asking people to make massive sacrifices, you have
to be even more trustworthy than normal because you're,
you're, you're making a bigger, ask a bigger demand
and for my two cents for what it's worth
in the UK. We blew that. We absolutely blew
it. Um So it wouldn't be great to, to
have to have, you know, run that experiment again.
If there's, you know, pandemic version 2.0 I would
have a lot of confidence and I suspect the
US would be the same. I mean, that was
another case, my family and friends over in America,
they were like there was no case of requiring
people to use that kind of surveillance technology for
health, for better or for worse. And you can
look at the outcomes on that. But that's what
I'm talking about. The technology is just one part
of it. There's the cultural bit about adaptation. Why
were certain European countries were happy to do it?
And others weren't certain countries could afford to do
it or have the infrastructure, do it? Certain populations
have an iphone or an Android and others just
don't. So it's not even an option for them,
right? Like all of those things come into play.
And if you're looking at utilitarianism, if you're looking
at like the greatest number of happiness for the
greatest numbers of people, you might want to do.
What I was trying to do is go back
to the original problem set and go what is
it that the healthcare profession says it needs, it
needs P pe they thought they needed ventilators that
later was dismissed because to be honest, by the
point, you're on a ventilator. It's pretty bad. Um,
THEY needed people to stay home and they really
needed a race for a vaccine. That is where
you want to put, given that you have limited
capital and limited resources. That's where you want to
go. But people were super excited with this idea
that this app on our phone is going to
allow us to open up society again.
Yeah. No, no, I have to tell you here
in Portugal, the government also put out an app
in 2021 if I'm not mistaken. And back then
they were moralizing people a lot. Oh, you should
install the app, blah, blah, blah, blah, it's a
health measure, whatever. Uh And I, and I was
like, so first of all, I never installed the
app because it was not mandatory. So I myself
never installed the app at all. Uh But, but
first of all, I was like, yeah, and if
certain people do not even have smartphones to begin
with, I mean, are you also going to moralize
those people? I mean, no one should be forced
to have a smartphone if they have one of
those older, uh, cell phones, I mean, who cares?
And, and then, and then I was like, I
was taking the pandemic very serious. I was masking
all the time. I was staying at home as
much as possible. Uh I was distancing as much
as possible. I got tested two or three times
during the pandemic. It always came out negative. Fortunately,
uh and I was like, doing everything apart from
the app and I was like, ok, if I'm
doing all of this, let's say that I uh
cross paths with someone who also has the app
installed and I get an alert on my phone
saying that I uh went by uh for uh
was less than 3 m or whatever away from
a person who got diagnosed with COVID. Yeah. What
am I going to do with that? Because let's
get real if I, even if I get COVID,
but I'm a symptomatic, I'm not going to get
tested. Let's get real. So I, I mean, what,
how uh valuable is that information for me? And,
and I, and if I am COVID negative, no,
no uh no one out there who goes by
me will get any alert saying that they crossed
paths with someone who has COVID. So, I mean,
and I got vaccinated as soon as possible. So
what, what can I gain or anyone who crosses
perhaps with me can gain from this? And I
never
though because like, like the, the sort of wanna
be scientist in me is like, I'm glad that
we tried it because like, I understand in those
pre vaccine days, like people were like, we have
to try whatever we can. That's understandable. Um I'm
glad we tried it in a number of different
countries with different political and cultural flavors. So, that
we could see like what words or what might
not work because we don't know again, uh wherever
the next pandemic will come from, we don't know
when that will happen and where it will be
with our technology. That's kind of why I was
really motivated to write the chapters. Like I want
to capture the UK case study to the best
of my ability now, not just the tech part
but the social cultural part. Because if this happens
again, you know, when it happened for us in
2020 I was going back to books on the
Spanish flu. In 1918, I was like, I need,
you know, I need, I need to skill up
fast. What do I need to know about this?
And I'm sure loads of people felt the same
way just as ordinary citizens. You don't have to
be a researcher to be interested in, you know,
learning what had happened in previous pandemics, but I
wanted to create something so that future future researchers
could go back and be like, well, what happened
in the UK? And you know, I'm sure loads
of people have written stuff on that um for
what it's worth, I will share this, the Ada
Lovelace Institute here in the United Kingdom is a
wonderful research institution and they've just come out with
their assessment of pandemic technology. I haven't had a
chance to read it yet because I just came
back from holiday. But it looks pretty interesting and
they do great work. So that might be something
for your viewers to check out if they want
to. I feel like the Turing Institute might have
as well. Um And definitely Oxford University has published
a lot of stuff on it, but I'm intrigued
by the ada Lovelace view because they often do
an international comparison. So there is cutting edge research
that I am unfortunately behind on at the moment.
But you know, we know it's there. So if
anyone wants to take a look at that, if
you don't want to hear what I have to
say by all means, don't go check out in
a lovely, they got some good stuff
and I mean, just to be clear, I'm not
completely dismissing these apps. I'm not saying 100% that
they didn't help at all that they weren't good
health measures. I'm just saying that first of all,
no one should be forced to have a smartphone.
That's the first point. Second of all, you shouldn't
moralize people for not having a smartphone or install,
really should moralize them when you're the British ministers
who were breaking all of their own
rules. Yeah, that's one
thing to moralize if you at least to walk
the walk. But if you're doing hypocrisy, like get
out and, and then my first and then the
third point and that's why I mentioned that I
really follow all the guidelines and all of that
to prevent COVID transmission is that you have to
convince me that it's worth it because I'm not
dumb and people are not dumb. Don't, don't treat
us as dumb like, oh, you should do this.
Yeah. Why, why you have
with anything? If you're asking people to make a
change, you have to show them why it is
worth it. Listen, I'm just aware of the fact
that it's approaching 11. I'm going to have to
let you go if that's ok because I unfortunately
have to talk to one of my clients.
Oh, yeah. No, no, sorry. I,
I, I love this chat but I was like,
oh, no, the time has flown. No,
no, I'm sorry, I wasn't aware that you had
that time limit. So, yeah. So just quickly before
we go, would you like to tell people where
they can find you and your work on the
internet?
Well, I mean, I'm a Google search away. Uh,
PROBABLY the easiest is my website, which is Habra,
uh, Hare brain.co. So you can find all my,
uh, television and radio and online writing. Um, AND
paper writing there. My book is available at all
good bookstores. You can just order it through your
local independent bookstore or Pay Il Amazon. It's up
to you your call, not mine how you want
to do it. So it's there. It's an audio
book too if you prefer to listen to it
rather than read it. But then you'll miss the
amazing date, this, which is in the book. So
it just depends on what you want. Um And
I'm on Twitter and linkedin in case anybody has
questions or wants to follow up or share something
that they think I've missed or that I need
to look at. I'm really, really lucky for some
reason, I have an incredible group of people from
the public who just send me stuff randomly tips
and things to look at or articles that are
actually really interesting or examples from their country that
I would never have heard about otherwise. So I
love to hear from people. If somebody wants to
get in touch, I would be very welcome. As
long as polite kind. No romance stuff, please. But
uh the marriage proposals get a bit weird uh
at the end. But no, I would love to
talk technology and ethics with um any of your
listeners or viewers and I'm so grateful to you
for the chance to have this chat.
No. Thank you so much for coming on the
show. Thank you for your time and hopefully somewhere
in the future we can have another conversation. I
really love this one. So
I would love that too. I will drop you
a note if I am ever in Portugal again,
which I hope I will be all be well
and let me know when it comes out. I'd
love to see it. Yeah. Sure. The marriage proposals
get a bit weird at the end. But no,
I would love to talk technology and ethics with
um, any of your listeners or viewers. And I'm
so grateful to you for the chance to have
this chat. No,
thank you so much for coming on the show.
Thank you for your time and hopefully somewhere in
the future we can have another conversation. I really
love this one. So I
would love that too. I will drop you a
note if I am ever in Portugal again, which
I hope I will be all right, be well
and let me know when it comes out. I'd
love to see it. Yeah,
sure. Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview.
Until the end. If you liked it, please do
not forget to like it, share, comment and subscribe.
And if you like more generally, what I'm doing,
please consider support the show on Patreon or paypal.
You have all of the links in the description
of this interview. The show is brought to you
by En Lights learning and development. Done differently. Check
their website at alights.com. I would also like to
give a huge thank you to my main patrons
and paypal supporters per Larson Jerry Mueller and Frederick
Sunda Bernards, all of election and Weser, Adam Castle
Matthew Whitting Whitting bear. No wolf, Tim Hollis, Eric,
Alania, John Connors, Philip Forrest, Connelly, Robert Winde Ruin,
Nai Zoup, Mark Nevs Colin Hall, Simon, Columbus, Phil
Cavanagh, Mikel, Stormer, Samuel Andrea Francis for the Agd
Alexander Dan Bauer, Fergal, Ken Hall, Herzog Michel, Jonathan
Libra Jars and the Correa Eric Heine Marc Smith,
Jan We Amal Franz David Sloan Wilson Yasa, Des
Roma Roach Jan Punter Romani Charlotte. Bliss, Nicole Barbar
and Pao Ay Nele Guy Madison, Gary G Haman,
Samo Zal Arien Y Nick Golden Paul Talent in
John Bar was Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden Brown,
Douglas Fry Franca Beto Lotti Gabriel Pan Cortez, Lalit
Scott Zachary Fish, Tim Duffy, Sonny Smith, John Wiesman,
Martin Aland, Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul George Arnold
Luke Lo A Georges off Chris Williamson, Peter Lawson,
David Williams Di Costa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex
Shaw and Murray Martinez Le Chevalier bangalore atheists, Larry
Daley Junior Holt Eric B. Starry Michael Bailey. Then
Sperber, Robert Grassy Rough the RP MD I Goran
Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radix, Mark Campbell, Richard
Bowen Thomas the Dubner Luke Ni Andre Story, Manuel
Oliveira, Kimberly Johnson and Benjamin Gilbert. A special thanks
to my producers is our web gem Frank Luca
Stan, Tom Weam Bernard Eni Ortiz Dixon Benedict Mueller,
Vege Gli Thomas Trumble Catherine and Patrick Tobin John
Carlo Montenegro, Robert Lewis and Al Nick Ortiz. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Serge Adrian and
Bogdan Kut. Thank you for all.